he Caribbean Sea is an oceanic sea largely situated on the Caribbean Plate. The Caribbean Sea is separated from the ocean by several island arcs of various ages. The youngest stretches from the Lesser Antilles to the Virgin Islands to the north east of Trinidad and Tobago off the coast of Venezuela. This arc was formed by the collision of the South American Plate with the Caribbean Plate and includes active and extinct volcanoes such as Mount Pelee, the Quill (volcano) on Sint Eustatius in the Caribbean Netherlands and Morne Trois Pitons on Dominica. The larger islands in the northern part of the sea Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica and Puerto Rico lie on an older island arc.

The geological age of the Caribbean Sea is estimated to be between 160 and
180 million years and was formed by a horizontal fracture that split the
supercontinent called Pangea in the Mesozoic Era.[6] It is assumed the
proto-caribbean basin existed in the Devonian period. In the early
Carboniferous movement of Gondwana to the north and its convergence with
the Euramerica basin decreased in size. The next stage of the Caribbean
Sea's formation began in the Triassic. Powerful rifting led to the
formation of narrow troughs, stretching from modern Newfoundland to the
west coast of the Gulf of Mexico which formed siliciclastic sedimentary
rocks. In the early Jurassic due to powerful marine transgression, water
broke into the present area of the Gulf of Mexico creating a vast shallow
pool. The emergence of deep basins in the Caribbean occurred during the
Middle Jurassic rifting. The emergence of these basins marked the beginning
of the Atlantic Ocean and contributed to the destruction of Pangaea at the
end of the late Jurassic. During the Cretaceous the Caribbean acquired the
shape close to that seen today. In the early Paleogene due to Marine
regression the Caribbean became separated from the Gulf of Mexico and the
Atlantic Ocean by the land of Cuba and Haiti. The Caribbean remained like
this for most of the Cenozoic until the Holocene when rising water levels
of the oceans restored communication with the Atlantic Ocean.

The Caribbean's floor is composed of sub-oceanic sediments of deep red clay in the deep basins and troughs. On continental slopes and ridges calcareous silts are found. Clay minerals likely having been deposited by the mainland river Orinoco and the Magdalena River. Deposits on the bottom of the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico have a thickness of about 1 km (0.62 mi). Upper sedimentary layers relate to the period from the Mesozoic to the Cenozoic (250 million years ago to present) and the lower layers from the Paleozoic to the Mesozoic. 
